it's a long-standing cherished tradition
of ours to revisit Intel's power numbers
and how they happen every single time we
review an Intel CPU this content is
going to be focused again on Intel MCE
on phrases like PL 1 PL 2 and tau we're
gonna be talking about TVB turbo boost
3.0 and all the other features that are
packaged into Intel's processors that
are defined as either boost part of
boost power or TDP if any of those
things confuse you or you're not quite
sure what they are this is the thing to
watch to make sure that you understand
how Intel's processors work and the
reason this has come up again we talk
about it now every single CPU launch
from Intel we can't escape this topic
the reason it's come up again is become
a because of a common misconception that
I'll read a quote to you from the
internets and it says probably only
expensive high-end motherboards will
have sustained performance shown on
these reviews and that is partly true
and partly not true at all so we're
gonna talk about that today and how both
of those statements can be
simultaneously accurate before that this
video is brought to you by Thermaltake
stuff ram RGB memory available from
3,000 megahertz up to 40 400 megahertz
and 8 gigabyte by 2 configurations the
Thermaltake tough Ram uses 10
addressable RGB LEDs for bright
illumination and comes in both black and
white kits of memory
learn more at the link in the
description below so first of all this
topic came about again as it does every
year because the numbers from various
review outlets including ours have
either been misunderstood or
misrepresented or just changed while
still being cited in comments after the
Intel CPU reviews this time it's the 10
series of Intel CPUs and we did a long
and exhaustive piece on Intel and its
power consumption numbers and how both
Intel and the motherboard makers are at
fault for the numbers that you see and
for violating the Intel official
guidance what we call spec but
technically the proper phrasing would be
official guidance or Intel default
settings these are the settings that
would actually get you close to Intel's
TDP number TDP yes is not one to one for
watts but it's pretty damn close for
Intel
once everything is actually running as
it is
specified in the Intel official guidance
to motherboard makers we're not going to
completely remake the content we made
for the 8700 K if you want a whole bunch
of charts with a lot of motherboards and
a lot of different settings and various
permutations and combinations tested
we'll link that below or on the screen
somewhere so that you can check it out
with the detailed testing this time
we're going to focus more on definition
of what all these phrases mean and
hopefully help the community better
understand what to take away from power
numbers and how to interpret things like
TVB what does that really mean what is
Tao how long's it supposed to last all
that stuff not more than four hours by
the way but anyway we've done enough of
this now to basically have the content
templated exiting power spec and testing
a processor outside of its advertised
Intel or and the default settings is a
related issue but not the key one that
we're tackling in this specific piece to
give a brief but really clear example of
what we're really talking about here the
Intel all core turbo in our all core
tests that we used for frequency
validation in the ten 900k review
specifically was about 4200 megahertz
after 56 seconds had elapsed that's
expected behavior if you're running
outside of the Intel official guidance
and you let the motherboard do whatever
the hell it wants a lot of the time the
motherboard makers will reconfigure it
so that it might run at for example
forty nine hundred megahertz for
eternity and we don't consider that
really fair to anybody
it's not fair to Intel because it
inflates their power numbers and makes
them look absolutely outrageous and it's
not fair to Andy or Intel's older parts
because now you're testing the processor
outside of how its advertised outside of
how it's specified and all the official
documentation and instead effectively
pre overclocking it now there is an
argument to be made for testing it this
way so long as it is described in a way
that viewers or readers can understand
what's going on and why because although
it's effectively a pre overclock if it's
done by the motherboard it's sort of
stock for that board but we don't really
do it that way and that's just a
philosophical difference so the key to
all this is P L 1 P L 2 and tau and we
need to define not only what those
numbers are but what those things mean
in this content a lot of people were
freaking out about quote 200
TI's power consumption for the ten 900k
or high sustained power consumption or
behavior of Intel CPUs and high-end
motherboards we're also noticing a lot
of people cherry-picking our three
hundred seventeen watt overclocked power
number and misrepresenting it in Commons
as if it's the stock performance of the
processor which is actually 125 watts in
that same chart to be fair Intel's
names are horrible and some of the worst
we've seen in a long time
there are worse names in terms of
misrepresenting a product like the GT
10:30 and the ddr4 version but in terms
of people understanding what the hell it
is you're selling a lot of the viewers
of our charts were and we don't fault
them for this scene the 10900 X I'm
thinking it's the ten nine hundred K but
they're really different and that's on
ends how of course that part so the 125
watt number is technically lower than
the 3900 X in a lot of applications
though the ten 900 ends up less
efficient just because of the core
deficit as we always say please don't
try to shortcut reviews because it can
misrepresent data and a lot of people
only consume content via comments now
it's a really unfortunate way that the
Internet is structured but when you
watch a review in part and then try to
share that information without really
watching it and digesting it it does the
service to the other people who come
into the channel or threat or whatever
and only read the comments because
they're trusting you they trusted you to
get it right and a few short cut the
review it might not be right so all that
said we have to look at now how the data
becomes what it is a lot of the freaked
out over the 250 watt number is because
of a lack of education on how Intel CPUs
actually worked and specifically there's
a lack of education and not to say that
the people are uneducated but that Intel
does a very poor job of educating the
audience of what it's processors do and
how they work the lack of information
here pertains to power limits and Intel
default settings there's a similar one
with 8700 k with a 7700 K and everything
in between including the 9000 series and
this was also true for Andes precision
boots - and PBO which people constantly
conflated but actually they're two
distinctly separate things we have a
whole separate video on that so the most
common misconception we're seeing is
about motherboards affecting performance
and that is sort of true but in a test
environment which is controlled properly
by our definition of proper everyone's
got kind of a different idea but our
definition of properly controlled is
that the motherboard shouldn't really
impact performance outside of things
like Auto V core which will affect
thermals and power and that's really it
as long as the motherboard can sustain
the CPU like you're using a reasonable
board for the CPU you're testing meaning
you're not using the vrm that is
underpowered for the CPU then all the
numbers should be about the same in
theory now this also requires control in
sub timings in the memory and just about
everything else but as long as you have
a control task platform having a $700
buzzer board or a $200 motherboard or
$150 motherboard it doesn't matter
as long as everything's controlled and
that specifically includes Intel PL one
PL 2 and tau and base clock and a couple
of other things like the multipliers but
you can get them to all be the same if
you set it to the Intel default
specification ie Intel official guidance
provided to the motherboard
manufacturers this is gonna be kind of
basic for the rest of our coverage
spectrum but it's important to go over
and we need to explain how conflicting
power numbers can exist they can all be
true but they might not have been taken
the same way and specifically assuming
we're all measuring at the EPS 12-volt
cables rather than the wall specifically
what you're really looking at is Auto V
core and then the Intel default settings
so jion's philosophy is that all CPUs
should be tested under their assumed
default settings because the motherboard
is responsible for setting a lot of
those things on the CPU we might have to
go in there and make sure that the
motherboard is following the spec so we
don't let motherboards cheat is
basically what we're saying here AMD
also has rules that we follow to make
sure it's following its own spec but
everything's got different terminology
and motherboard makers do a lot of
screwy things to cheat each other out of
the charts for the outlets that do rank
motherboards against each other by
things like fps they'll do stuff like
set the P clock to 100.8 because that's
cool and it gets you maybe an extra 30
megahertz or something like that
to beat the next guy despite this being
a motherboard thin it is also Intel's
problem because Intel ends up looking
bad when the power comes
options through the roof because the
motherboard manufacturer decided to exit
the official guidance in order to outdo
the next motherboard manufacturer it's
also Intel's problem because they don't
step in and put a firm foot down on what
should actually be shipped stock and so
you end up in a scenario where it's kind
of freeform the interpretation Intel and
AMD actually takes shots at each other
in the review guides about what settings
should be applied for the competing
company in order to ensure what the
other company thinks is a fair
comparison note that we unilaterally
ignore review guides and don't open them
except to dig for misleading marketing
later but we'll show some examples on
the screen most of our reviews of
reviewer guides result in the companies
removing sections in that subsequent
iteration and we've seen similar effects
within toss too as they've sort of
slimmed down over the years and gotten
away from the marketing because they're
talking to a technical review our
audience so they're more likely to get
got when they say things that aren't
true for our review is we always
configure the CPU to follow turbo expiry
guidance that's a time limit we follow
its TDP values TDP is not one to want
but it's again pretty damn close with
Intel and that's after the Tao limit so
a quick reminder on boost advertising
one of the things we've seen come up is
Intel calls at five point three
gigahertz that's not accurate because
it's not five point three all core or
we've seen that Intel calls at five
point three gigahertz but you have to be
under seventy degrees Celsius and
that's not accurate because it's
different or something from what AMD
does but a reminder on boost advertising
Andy just went through this with the
rise in 3000 launch when it was having
trouble meeting its advertised boost
clocks mind you the way it works is the
companies will advertise on their single
fastest core both of them do this it's
standard it's been how it works for
years and years now
and as long as everyone understands that
that's fine because the reality is that
you really can't predict the type of
application a lot of them aren't all
core all the time 100% load constantly
on all threads and so it does make sense
to get the CPU to boost higher on a
limited core account workload when it's
not fully loaded that's just getting
more it's extracting more out of the
processor for people who don't want to
do it themselves with overclocking which
by the way is most
is the same with GPU Auto boosting it's
kind of annoying from an overclocking
perspective because it reduces how
impressive the overclock looks the CPU
shift at 3.7 and could technically boost
to 5.3 but they decided that it's only
3.7 because they don't want people to be
confused by the marketing it maker over
clocks look a lot more impressive and
the reality is that advertising this way
whatever you think of it everyone
at this point in the industry pretty
much understands it and it is we think a
reasonable way to do things just because
both companies are doing it and they
sort of do it the same way so everyone's
on the same page at least in terms of
the products they're selling and it does
a bit makes sense
all right tricks motherboard makers play
if you just drop a cpu into a socket and
let it rip without actually controlling
your test bench or your build then the
numbers will be whatever the motherboard
manufacturer decided they would be we
control our test bench again before
review purposes but you don't have to if
you're just building a system for
yourself
and that may impact the cooler you
choose for instance if you're letting
your board run at 4.9 gigahertz all core
all the time and where that in air is
run under Intel default settings where
we might have between the two of us
something like 125 watt power difference
actual power and that is a cooler change
so what are the motherboard makers do to
try and trick people and best each other
in a batch of fisticuffs as it may be
increasing base clock is one of them
Emma sighs the most guilty of this in
the past but they've gotten better about
it this generation base clock affects
most buses in the system and affects
memory and CPU speeds so it's more than
just the CPU frequency going up our
original research piece on this for the
9000 series talked about this a lot base
clock is multiplied against the
multiplier for frequency some board
makers will have boards around at 100.3
base clock 100 point five or even
upwards of 100 point eight we've seen
101 as well multiply that against ten
cores and maybe 40 X or something and
you suddenly have enough of a difference
for board a whereas board B to have a
gap 100 point eight times 48 would give
you forty eight thirty eight megahertz
instead of 48 hundred megahertz across
six or ten cores that really starts to
create a difference this we think is
cheating and it's bad because it creates
instability and it creates problems for
the end user when they don't understand
their system is technically
overclocked bass clock in particular is
a bad one to cheat with for the
motherboard manufacturers because with
base clock you're now in a scenario
where you're overclocking basically
everything in the damn system so it's
all questionable whether it's stable or
not and this can be bad for the user MCE
this is less common after our previous
three generations of expose is but it is
absolutely still around board makers
used to commonly enable MCE or
multi-core enhancement which would apply
the single core turbo across all cores
all the time you're potentially taking
your cpu from 4.8 to 5.0 gigahertz all
core which massively shuffles the charts
and is functionally an overclock or from
4.2 to 4.9 turbo time expiry is another
cheat that they do this is a tricky one
that we caught with the 8000 series
launch and again with the 9000 series
launch it was the new way for
motherboard makers to disguise their
modification of Intel spec they do this
to try and beat other motherboard makers
and review charts but we counter it with
manual controls and use it to burn the
marketing arm Intel spec defines that
the 10 900k expires from turbo at 56
seconds but some other wood makers
extend it to 175 seconds or longer 400
in some cases and that affects the test
results there are other ways but these
are the most common ways that
motherboard manufacturers try to play
with the results if you're not being
mindful of it Intel's turbo boosting
language has gotten confusing and we
have to reference it regularly to make
sure everyone's on the same page so the
keywords base clock turbo clock turbo
2.0 it's for above a 3.0 TBB or thermal
velocity boost and that's probably the
key stuff we'll start with so Intel's
default specifications or settings
define a TDP of 125 watts again TDP is
not one-to-one with power and these is
most certainly not since they reverse
engineered a number to equal Intel's for
SI and OAM business reasons more on that
and in our other pieces but it is pretty
close to one-to-one in some scenarios
with intel's TDP definition intel
defines its boost guidance as follows
the i9 10900 k has APL want of 125 a PL
2 of 250 and tau of 56 seconds will
define these in a second the 10 600 K
has PL 1 125 PL to 182
and Tao 56 seconds po1 is the power
limit 1 which is 125 and happens to
align with TDP Intel's TDP calculation
takes the IHS into account and the
company does some justification via the
thermal capacity of the IHS but again
that's a different topic the CPU is
supposed to limit itself to 125 watts
under the lower of the two power limits
pl2 is parallel mat 2 which is the short
term boosting allowance this one is set
to 250 watts but 250 watts isn't
actually needed if the voltage is lower
so we'll talk about that too and again
it's not quite one-to-one this is
evident in our power test where we saw a
turbo draw of 200 watts in Cinebench are
24 under 56 seconds Tao is the turbo
time limit this is the amount of time
that Intel default settings specify
turbo is allowed to run before it
expires and returns the CPU to lower
clocks like it's all core base or the
limited core turbo boost clocks for
these two CPUs that's a 56 second window
our chart on the screen illustrates this
time window where you can see the CPU
starts out at a higher frequency in the
test but it drops down to lower boost
levels pretty much immediately power
consumption lines up with this and drops
from about 200 watts at the current
clamp at the EPS 12 volt cables to about
125 watts on the 10 900k finally power
as a quick note we're talking a lot
about power limits that doesn't
necessarily mean the CPU uses as much as
it's limited to or allowed to a 250 watt
PL to doesn't necessarily mean the CPU
will use all 250 Watts available to it
and our testing for instance we found
that it typically peaked lower that's
because power in watts is derived from
volts and amps and in this instance the
motherboard used is often running at a
better Auto V core for stock settings
than some competing motherboards we used
the ASUS Maximus 12 extreme in the past
gigabyte has stood out as a shining
example of a company that has blasted
Auto V core so high back in the 7700 K
era especially that anyone who tested
with that board got to see the comments
where people said why is Intel so hot
Intel CPUs are comically hot and for the
70s one hard K especially it wasn't
really that true in fact one of the
earliest research pieces we did on this
topic was showing how the all
V Corps was set to such an extreme at
about one point four on that board
that we could run it that's something
like from memory maybe one point one
eight eight or one point two and achieve
the same performance but the power
consumption drops massively so this is
another scenario where motherboard
makers an Intel they're in it together
and if the motherboard makers are trying
to either shortcut or just cheat the
charts then it does make Intel look bad
as well despite looking good and maybe
say gaming where it's boosting higher
than it should be in our reviews of both
CPUs we used a manufacturer tool to
verify that our CPUs running at the
Intel official spec we published those
screenshots in the reviews to publicly
verify with the audience that we were
running out the correct stock settings
and we'll drop those in again now this
is what stock should look like if you're
using CPUs under Intel's guidance and
default settings anything outside of
these numbers isn't stock and it
wouldn't be fair to Intel for power or
AMD for comparative performance to imply
that it is stock so we test again with
defaults in our ten nine hundred K
validation image you can see the back
cores 0 through core seven have a
default max ratio of fifty-one meaning
that they will never exceed five point
one gigahertz at 100 B clock tours 8 and
nine run 53 X which we showed in our sin
demands warranty frequency validation
chart in the review will put that one on
the screen again for reference this
means that under limited core boots in
scenarios like single core load only two
of the cores will ever peak at five
point three gigahertz and that'll only
happen under 70 degrees Celsius all core
frequency is about forty two hundred
megahertz again for perspective next up
intel thermal velocity boost we need to
define the types of boosting behavior
intel hasn't in play here kind of like
we needed to do so for it and the and
precision boost to vs p vo intel's
thermal velocity boost is new to desktop
but debuted on laptop cpus TVB is a
dumber version of nvidia GPU boost or
and the precision boost to and we don't
mean that in a deriving way but rather
in a technical sense it's not intended
to be a smart scaling that intricately
scales against temperature all the way
down the stack with Nvidia or AMD we see
scaling every 5 degrees Celsius or so of
change which complicates testing but
functionally pushes the components to
their maximum performance with minimal
overclocking oversight
that's a positive for the overall user
base intel's is a definitive threshold
at 70 degrees celsius tks
if cpu t case is below 70 degrees you
get an extra 100 megahertz on the 10900
k if it's above 70 degrees you're on at
five point two gigahertz peak boost
rather than 5.3 peak boost this only
applies if you are within PL two and if
you're under tau as well here's a table
showing how all the boosts line up the
ten 900k is all core frequency in an AV
X workload after tau expiry and within
power limits comes out to about forty
two hundred megahertz as shown in our
previous chart for base frequency that's
three point seven gigahertz the all core
turbo velocity boost frequency is four
point nine but that's limited in
duration and in power budget some
benchmarks may test with the four point
nine gigahertz TVB frequency sustained
for longer periods of time than the
official Intel guidance to motherboard
manufacturers would dictate as long as
that's disclosed to the audience and
made clear that's fine we don't agree
with that viewpoint but we can
respectfully disagree and see the
reasoning to do both the ten 600 K for
reference doesn't have TVB our frequency
hold chart from the ten 600 K review
shows how its behavior is a simpler line
CPU is enabled with TVB include only the
ten nine hundred K ten nine hundred K F
10 910 nine hundred F the ten 700 K and
below including the i5 and i3 CPUs do
not have TVB the five point three
gigahertz up to number four the ten nine
hundred K is achieved on no greater than
2 cores simultaneously while under the
TVB thermal threshold and within power
limits and tau the rest of the boost
numbers are accounted for by turbo boost
three which maxes out at five point two
gigahertz two core and then turbo boost
two for the rest which maxes out at four
point eight gigahertz all core and
five-foot-one gigahertz two core Intel
also has turbo boost 3.0 and deployment
this is existed for a number of years
since about twenty sixteen or so
including on HD T platforms and even had
a custom driver and software package
that you had to install the time to use
it
turbo boost maxi point now identifies
the fastest two cores and assigns single
and dual-core workloads to those course
those cores are also the highest
boosting aside from TVB Turbo Boost 2.0
is
simpler and only affected by power and
to some extent thermals
whereas turbo booze 3.0 can also be
affected by OS support drivers in some
older deployments workload and the usual
thermal power and time windows the CPU
remains within warranty with turbo boost
3.0 active and does not violate the
warranty much like precision boost 2
does not violate the warranty for AMD so
that's how it all works this is a really
old discussion point for us we've done
it so much at this point now that we're
really just fine with referring you to
the most recent piece from probably the
19900 k if you want to learn more in
terms of charts and data about how
different motherboards interact with
those CPUs and it's not a one-to-one
here but a lot of the same games apply
so the real point of this is to define
all of those numbers what they mean what
intel says is its specification which is
how we test it because that's I should
note this too that's going to be
actually conservatively low if anything
so the official guidance our default
specification from AMD and from Intel
both because they both care about power
almost more than anything in a lot of
cases you look at the wider market
outside of enthusiasts their guidance is
almost always going to shoot lower than
what these motherboard manufacturers
will do actually a 100% of time will
shoot lower unless the board is broken
from our point of view that number that
comes out is the correct one to show in
a review because you have to draw a line
somewhere and say this is overclocking
and this is out of the box and for us we
care about out of the box if we're
showing it stock in a review when we
want to overclock it we overclock it and
those numbers are marked separately in
all the charts so we try to just make it
really clear for everyone but we don't
obviously shove all this information
into the reviews so it's still important
to put out there for people talking
about the 250 watt number a lot of the
discussion we're seeing is as if that
number is the permanent one but in
reality if you're using the CPU as Intel
defines it stock and if the motherboard
manufacturers listen and you can tweak
it if they don't by the way then that
number it would be 200 maybe it's a 250
depending on the workload and all core
sustained for 56 seconds and after that
it should fall pretty close to 125
before accounting for VR I'm efficiency
losses
remind us a little bit so if you play
game or run an application for let's say
an hour and use it under the Intel
default settings it should be closer to
125 watts if you expand it and you're on
MCE or ignore turbo limits stuff like
that then yeah it's gonna be higher
power consumption but the important
thing is that everyone understands how
the power numbers are derived and why
and hopefully this helps with that so
key words PL 1 PL 2 tau and tau is the
especially important one because the one
that motherboard manufacturers most
often screw with to try and throw people
off so that's how the CPU is supposed to
run and what all of its terminology
means in terms of reviews you know how
we feel about it at this point that's
not to say that doing it other ways is
wrong in fact there's a lot of value to
be provided by doing it through other
methods through not doing it by Intel
default specification or guidance the
value would be mostly that you can show
what motherboard manufacturers are doing
screwy things or you can maybe show the
audience hey this is what you can get
out of it if you buy this board or this
is what you can get out of it if you're
afraid of overclock and you want it to
be pre overclocked for you there's value
there as long as it's all disclosed and
this isn't a knock out reviewers it's
really thin with the audience let's make
sure everyone understands what they're
looking at because different reviewers
many of whom we respect in the space
obviously have different approaches and
that's good it's good to have that
diversity but a lot of time what's lost
when viewers or readers are looking at
different outlets takes on a product is
they'll sort of compare our test versus
this task force is that test without any
of the nuance and this goes back to the
original comment about not spreading
misinformation and if you lose all that
nuance what happens is you have a whole
bunch of numbers that mean nothing and
that's not useful to anyone
so watch within context hopefully that
helps everybody and leave your questions
on this topic below if you have more we
all reach out to Intel if you need any
definitions that we can't easily get and
we'll carry on the topic subscribe for
more we got asteroid our cameras
accessed on earth to help us out
directly on pieces like this like by
backordering one of our brand new mouse
mats that sold out right away he heard
me say it a few times now but thanks for
the support
it's phenomenal but we did think we had
six months of inventory
and it lasted two days so check back for
more we'll see you all next time
[Music]